# An interplay between transcription factors and recombinant protein synthesis in Yarrowia lipolytica at transcriptional and functional levels

Abstract: Transcriptional Regulatory Networks (TRNs) associated with recombinant protein (rProt) 9 synthesis in Yarrowia lipolytica are still under-described. Yet, it is foreseen that skillful manipulation 10 with TRNs would enable global fine-tuning of the host strain’s metabolism towards a high-level-11 producing phenotype. Our previous studies investigated transcriptomes of Y. lipolytica strains over-12 producing biochemically different rProts, and the functional impact of transcription factors (TF) 13 overexpression (OE) on rProt synthesis capacity in this species. Hence, much knowledge has been 14 accumulated and deposited in public repositories. In this study, we combined both biological da-15 tasets, and enriched them in further experimental data, to investigate an interplay between TFs and 16 rProts synthesis in Y. lipolytica at transcriptional and functional levels. Technically, the RNAseq da-17 tasets were extracted and re-analyzed for the TFs’ expression profiles. Of the 140 TFs in Y. lipolytica, 18 87 TF-encoding genes were significantly deregulated in at least one of the strains. The expression 19 profiles were juxtaposed against the rProt amounts from 125 strains co-overexpressing TF and rProt. 20 In addition, several strains bearing knock-outs (KO) in the TF loci were analyzed to get more insight 21 into their actual involvement in rProt synthesis. Different profiles of the TFs' transcriptional dereg-22 ulation and the impact of their OE or KO on rProts synthesis were observed, and new engineering 23 targets were pointed.

doi: XXX

16th International Congress on Yeasts - Cape Town, RPA 2024, oral presentation in Yeast Metabolism and Metabolic Control
